UTxO-HD for-developers documentation (#250)
input-output-hk/ouroboros-consensus: docs/utxo-hd/v0.1/for-developers.md

headaches in the past. When a blockchain is running a `HardForkBlock` (as
Cardano does), the overall type of the data stored in the `DbChangelog`
and in the `BackingStore` are maps from some key type into an N-ary sum of value
types (one for each era). But applying a block in a particular era requires a
ledger state in said era.

So each time we apply a block, we convert the inputs that come from reading the
`BackingStore` and forwarding through the `DbChangelog` into values of the era
in which we are applying the block, effectively duplicating the whole set. This
is fine in the Consensus use case because for each block this set will be quite
small. However this imposes an important restriction, one cannot just simple
project in and out the whole UTxO set on every ledger state (and not mantain a
sequence of differences) because this effectively tri-plicates the whole UTxO
set on every block which blows up the memory of any machine.

If in doubt on how to interpret this section please contact us.

## How can I update my code to use UTxO-HD

In these early fases, you can choose whether to update your code to UTxO-HD or

> simply mock all the operations, for the latter we provide a new package that you

Reviewer: `operations – for the latter`

might want to use.

### A) I don't want to use UTxO-HD yet

Wrapping your block applications into `LegacyBlock` from the
`ouroboros-consensus-cardano-legacy-block` package will result in all the
UTxO-HD operations being mocked and in principle you should not see any big
performance loss (you would essentially be keeping just a fingertree of empty

> values on top of a pre-UTxO-HD node). This was succesfuly done already by

Reviewer: `successfully`

# UTxO-HD for developers

This document aims to provide a guide on how to integrate the UTxO-HD
implementation into downstream clients.

Clarification requests and questions are more than welcome.

## Why UTxO-HD

Over time, the `cardano-node` implementation's memory usage has been steadily
increasing. A sync with mainnet shows that currently the node uses around 16GBs
of memory at the peak. Not every user of the Cardano blockchain has a computer
with that much memory and therefore it becomes necessary to lower the memory of
the running node.

A big chunk of that memory is consumed by mantaining the UTxO set, with its many
millions of entries. UTxO-HD solves this by extracting this set from the ledger
state and dumping it into the disk. This effectively lowers the memory by 5GB
(tentative numbers shown by ad-hoc benchmarks, should not be considered exact).
However this comes at a cost, both in speed performance and in complexity of the
code.

This design is based on the technical report "Storing the Cardano ledger state
on disk: analysis and design options" by Duncan Coutts and Douglas Wilson.

> ## Implementation

Reviewer 2: Important aspects to  mention:

- Ledger remains pure, IO happens in Consensus.
- Ledger rules only need a (very small) subset of the UTxO.
- Why did we parametrize the ledger state type?
- Why do we have map kinds and what do they mean?

The Cardano Ledger code remains unaltered, oblivious to the fact that the
Consensus layer is managing the UTxOs present in a ledger state, but by design,
the Ledger rules that involve evaluating a block on top of a ledger state only
need to consult the UTxOs that are consumed by that block, and produce UTxOs
that were not present in the UTxO set of the input state. This allows us to
provide ledger states to the ledger rules in which the UTxO set is just a
subset/restriction to the values required by the block in turn.

> 

Reviewer 2: Here we should link the idea of "hydrating the ledger state" to the *need for diffs*.

... we use the idea of anti-cache

There arises a nice algebra of deltas (as seen in the design document)
produced by each block, what we call `Delta` or `Diff` in the implementation.

> A ledger state is no longer a inscrutable data structure from the Consensus

Reviewer 2: I have the feeling it might still be unclear why we need to put UTxO in and out. Also, the relation to the different map kinds is not completely clear either.  In other words, the fact that we need to put data into the ledger state seems to be clear, but why do we need different map kinds?

and it is exposed as a configuration parameter that can be tweaked by the user,
but the default is set to `k + 100`.

Pushing and splitting this sequence is one of the main causes of speed loss in
the node. Maintaining this sequence of differences is tricky if we don't want to
have to traverse the whole sequence every time. We store it in a modified
[`FingerTree`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/anti-diffs/tree/main/fingertree-rm)
that keeps a root measure that is the combination of all the deltas so that we
can just apply that, but it comes at a cost as we are pushing only one element
into the `FingerTree` after each block, and splitting a `FingerTree` is already
a costly operation.

### The Backing Store (on-disk store)

The [backing
store](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore.hs)
is what provides a whole UTxO set at some specific slot in the chain. On top of
the values that exist in the backing store, the sequence of differences in the
LedgerDB can be applied to create a UTxO set at a specific slot younger than the
one in the backing store.

> Functionally it is just a key-value pair, and we provide two implementations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Functionally it is just a key-value store, and we provide two implementations:
```

- [InMemory](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore/InMemory.hs):
  is a `Data.Map` that lives in a `TVar`.
- [LMDB](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore/LMDB.hs)
  uses [LMDB](http://www.lmdb.tech/doc/) bindings to keep a database in a file in the disk.

To be precise, only the LMDB implementation will decrease the memory usage, but
it comes at a cost as I/O has to be performed to read and write values. We
expect SPOs with powerful machines to use the InMemory implementation and every
other user to move to the LMDB implementation.

### Communication with the ledger

From the point of view of the communication with the Ledger rules, it turns out
that for each block we need a way to inject (and project) the ledger tables into
the actual ledger state so that we can continue using the Ledger code without
modifying it. As the Ledger ledger-state type depends on the type of the block,
each block type defined in the Consensus layer has to provide a way to do so.

> But the Consensus-Ledger API assumes the existence of this projection/injection

Reviewer 2: Why "But"?

functions for each block type (i.e. needs the instance `CanStowLedgerTables
(LedgerState blk)`), and it defines a general flow for **applying a block: a
ledger state with some values (`ValuesMK`) goes in and a ledger state with the
corresponding deltas (`DiffMK`) comes out**. This is reflected in the
`(re)applyBlockLedgerResult` functions:

```haskell
applyBlockLedgerResult ::
     HasCallStack
  => LedgerCfg l
  -> blk
  -> Ticked1 l ValuesMK
  -> Except (LedgerErr l) (LedgerResult l (l DiffMK))
```

### Preparing a ledger state for the Ledger rules

> In order to provide a `LedgerState` with values (`ValuesMK`) to the Ledger, we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide a `LedgerState` with values (`ValuesMK`) to the Ledger, we
```

need to follow this sequence of steps:

1. Consult which UTxOs the block will need (`getBlockKeySets`).

2. Read those from the BackingStore (module `ReadsKeySets`).

3. Apply the diffs in the sequence of deltas in memory up to the desired slot (
   `forwardTableKeySets`).

4. Inject the deltas into the ledger state and call the desired Ledger rule.

This read and forwarding is another of the main sources of speed loss in the
node. Before UTxO-HD, the values were just in memory already so we didn't need
to do any further work to bring them in. Now we even have (depending on the
backing store chosen) to perform I/O to read those.

### Era boundaries

In general, ticking a ledger state should not modify the values in the UTxO set,

> but there are two exceptions in the Cardano case when ticking crosses an era

Reviewer 2: ~Perhaps we should mention these exceptions and why are they there.~ I see this comes below, so maybe we could add a "(see below)" for impatient readers like myself :D

boundary. For this reason, the general scheme for **ticking a block is: a ledger
state without a UTxO set (`EmptyMK`) goes in and a ledger state with some deltas

> (`DiffMK`) comes out**. This is reflected in `applyChainTickLedgerResult`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth repeating that the deltas of `applyChainTickLedgerResult` will be empty except in two cases/era boundaries (mentioned above).

  addresses) were consumed into the treasury. This transition will return said
  UTxOs as deletions (see `translateLedgerStateShelleyToAllegraWrapper`
  [here](../../../ouroboros-consensus-cardano/src/ouroboros-consensus-cardano/Ouroboros/Consensus/Cardano/CanHardFork.hs))..

### The mempool

The mempool behaves pretty much as a virtual block. The design is not
particularly complex as we just ask the backing store for the inputs for a
transaction when applying it. The only caveat compared to the pre-UTxO-HD
implementation is that previously it cached the latest ledger state and
therefore we could run a separate thread that would sync the mempool with the
LedgerDB and revalidate all the transactions when necessary, but now we might
not be able to apply a transaction if the ledger state on top of which we had
applied the others is now gone from the LedgerDB. Therefore, adding a
transaction might in some cases trigger a sync with the LedgerDB (and
revalidation).

### Ledger state queries

Most of the queries don't require the UTxO set but there are three in particular
that do: `GetUTxOByTxIn`, `GetUTxOWhole` and `GetUTxOByAddress`. We assume that

> `GetUTxOWhole` is a debug query so we don't pay much attention to it as we

Reviewer: that's fair, if people know that it's an impractical operation

just wondering if there's any tracing / logging (or if it's worth having any) to ensure that noone attempts to use it and then doesn't know why it's taking forever lol

> `GetUTxOWhole` is a debug query so we don't pay much attention to it as we

Author: I think it is already known, and I think it is not really a useful query in a general situation. It is mainly useful for debugging testnets with small UTxO sets.

expect it will be used with small-ish UTxO sets. For `GetUTxOByTxIn`, the story
is simple, query the Backing store for the `TxIn` and forward it through the
sequence of diffs.

However, it is `GetUTxOByAddress` that poses a real problem, as we need to query
the whole UTxO set, apply all the differences to it and then traverse it
entirely to find out the UTxOs belonging to an address. This query is now quite
slow and in fact its usage is discouraged. It should not be a responsibility of
the node to maintain access to this if it is not needed by the logic that runs
the blockchain, so the plan is to move this into a separate process/client that

> runs an index of UTxOs by address that can provide fast access to it.

Reviewer 2: We might want to link again to https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-node/issues/4678

### The hard-fork tables

It is worth mentioning one important caveat that has given us quite a lot of

> headaches in the past. When a blockchain is running a `HardForkBlock` (as

Reviewer 2: Does "in the past" refer to pre-UTxO-HD? Might be worth clarifying.

Cardano does), the overall type of the data stored in the `DbChangelog`
and in the `BackingStore` are maps from some key type into an N-ary sum of value
types (one for each era). But applying a block in a particular era requires a

> ledger state in said era.

Reviewer 2: We can add a diagram that illustrates this.

So each time we apply a block, we convert the inputs that come from reading the
`BackingStore` and forwarding through the `DbChangelog` into values of the era
in which we are applying the block, effectively duplicating the whole set. This
is fine in the Consensus use case because for each block this set will be quite
small. However this imposes an important restriction, one cannot just simple
project in and out the whole UTxO set on every ledger state (and not mantain a
sequence of differences) because this effectively tri-plicates the whole UTxO

> set on every block which blows up the memory of any machine.

Reviewer 2: I think one example here would be great.

# UTxO-HD for developers

This document aims to provide a guide on how to integrate the UTxO-HD
implementation into downstream clients.

Clarification requests and questions are more than welcome.

## Why UTxO-HD

Over time, `cardano-node` memory usage has been steadily increasing.
Synchronizing from scratch with mainnet shows that currently the node uses
around 16GBs of memory at the peak. Not every user of the Cardano blockchain has
a computer with that much memory and therefore it becomes necessary to lower the
memory of the running node.

A big chunk of that memory is consumed by mantaining the UTxO set, with its many
millions of entries. UTxO-HD solves this by extracting this set from the ledger
state and dumping it into the disk. This effectively lowers the memory by 5GB
(tentative numbers shown by ad-hoc benchmarks, should not be considered exact).
However this comes at a cost, both in speed performance and in complexity of the
code.

This design is based on the technical report ["Storing the Cardano ledger state

> on disk: analysis and design options"](../utxo-db/utxo-db.tex) by Duncan Coutts

Reviewer 3: :+1: yup, this doc is in a decent state to share.

and Douglas Wilson.

## Implementation

The Ledger rules that are involved when applying a block on top of a ledger
state only need to consult the UTxOs that are consumed by that block (and
produce UTxOs that were not present in the UTxO set of the input state). This
makes it possible to leave the [Ledger
code](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-ledger) unaltered (at least in
this first implementation): we only need to provide ledger states to the ledger
rules in which the UTxO set is just a subset/restriction to the values required
to apply a block which is usually small. Getting these subsets from disk and
ensuring their consistency is a task for the Consensus layer.

The way Consensus solves this is by maintaining _differences/deltas_ (`Diff` or
`Delta` in the implementation) for each block, that can be used to later on
construct a suitable ledger state (operation that we named _hydrating the ledger

> state_). In case you are planning on manipulating deltas on your own, note that

Author: Indeed it is complicated to convey the fact that "the Ledger State" and "the ledger state" might mean different things

|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `ValuesMK k v`                    | `Map k v`                     | Creating ledger states for the Ledger rules          |
| `KeysMK k v`                      | `Set k`                       | Querying the disk for the values needed by a block   |
| `DiffMK k v`                      | `Map k (Delta v)`             | Carrying the differences created by applying a block |
| `SeqDiffMK k v`                   | `Fingertree SlotNo (Map k v)` | Carrying the differences for the last `k` blocks     |
| `EmptyMK k v`                     | $\emptyset$                   | When not needing info about the UTxO set             |
| `TrackingMK k v`                  | `(Map k v, Map k (Delta v))`  | Carrying both `ValuesMK` and `DiffMK`                |

After UTxO-HD, `LedgerState blk` is now parametrized by a `MapKind` that
indicates what kind of information is there with regards to the UTxO set. This
information is sometimes needed in isolation, detached from the ledger state,

> and for that we have a newtype named `LedgerTables`.

Author: I explained it below. Good point

type LedgerTables :: (Type -> MapKind -> Type) -> MapKind -> Type
newtype LedgerTables l mk = LedgerTables {
    getLedgerTables :: mk (Key l) (Value l)
  }
```

### Keeping the ledger states in memory (the ~LedgerDB~ DbChangelog)

If we were to store only the resulting ledger state after applying a block, we
would lose track of what values were consumed. On the other hand, if we kept a
UTxO set next to each ledger state, we would just defeat the purpose of UTxO-HD.
To solve this, we keep one copy of the UTxO set at some immutable block (usually
the immutable tip, but not necessarily) and then the differences of each
volatile block. Moving that copy of the UTxO set to disk is what achieves the
memory decrease that we were seeking with this project.

For efficiency reasons, instead of keeping a sequence of states carrying a
`DiffMK` each, we keep two sequences: one of `EmptyMK` ledger states and one
with all the `DiffMK`s grouped into a modified
[`FingerTree`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/anti-diffs/tree/main/fingertree-rm).

This need for a different data structure to hold the history of Ledger states
prompted us to use a `DbChangelog` instead of the pre-UTxO-HD `LedgerDB`.

> Together with a pointer to the data in the disk, this is functionally equivalent

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that seems good.

  }
  
data AnchorlessDbChangelog l = AnchorlessDbChangelog {
    adcLastFlushedSlot :: !(WithOrigin SlotNo)
  , adcDiffs           :: !(LedgerTables l SeqDiffMK)
  , adcStates          :: !(StatesSequence l)
  }
  
type StatesSequence l = 
  AnchoredSeq (WithOrigin SlotNo) (l EmptyMK) (l EmptyMK)
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "DbChangelog l" as dbch {
        state "LastFlushedState :: l EmptyMK" as lfs
        state StateSequence {
            direction LR
            state "ImmutableTip :: l EmptyMK" as tip
            tip --> L1
            L1 --> L2
            state "..." as dots1
            L2 --> dots1
            dots1 --> Lk
        } 
        state Diffs {
            direction LR
            state "D-1" as dm1
            state "D-2" as dm2
            dm2 --> dm1
            dm1 --> D0
            D0 --> D1
            D1 --> D2
            state "..." as dots2
            D2 --> dots2
            dots2 --> Dk
        } 
    }
```

In this diagram, `D1` corresponds to the delta resulting between the states
`ImmutableTip` and `L1`, `D2` is the delta between `L1` and `L2`, and so on.
Notice the existence of deltas with negative numbers. These are the deltas

> belonging to the (already garbage-collected as they are not needed) immutable

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
belonging to the (possibly already garbage-collected) immutable
```

> states between the `LastFlushedState` and the `ImmutableTip`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add a sentence explaining that we keep the "extra" diffs so that we can flush them?

Related question: would it be helpful to carry a single "extra" diff that is maintained as the simply composition of all the immutable-but-not-yet-flushed diffs?

Author: Added the sentence. For your other question, maybe? Maybe we could carry a seqdiff (fingertree) for the volatile chain but just a diff for the immutable chain? What do you think @jorisdral ?

Author: Referenced in #310

The sequence of differences is kept in a `FingerTree` as mentioned above.
Pushing and splitting this sequence is one of the main causes of speed loss in
the node. In order to not traverse the whole `FingerTree` every time we need to
use the deltas, the modified `FingerTree` keeps a root measure that is the
combination of all the deltas so that we can just apply that, but it comes at a
cost as we are pushing only one element into the `FingerTree` after each block,
and splitting a `FingerTree` is already a costly operation.

One might think: why then keep this sequence at all? There are the reasons
mentioned at the beginning of this section but there is also a crucial one for
the well-functioning of the node: we need to be able to quickly consult any of
the last `k` ledger states in order to evaluate forks and roll-back the chain if
necessary. Using this sequence, we are able to re-construct a `k`-recent Ledger

> state suitable for these purpose.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
state suitable for this purpose.
```

In order to manipulate the Backing Store, we produce a
`BackingStoreValueHandle`, see the previous link for more details.

On top of the values that exist in the backing store, the sequence of
differences in the LedgerDB can be applied to create a UTxO set at a specific
slot younger than the one in the backing store.

Functionally it is just a key-value store (plus the `SlotNo` of the last
flushed state), and we provide two implementations:

- [InMemory](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore/InMemory.hs):
  is a `Data.Map` that lives in a `TVar`.
- [LMDB](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore/LMDB.hs)
  uses [LMDB](http://www.lmdb.tech/doc/) bindings to keep a database in a file in the disk.

To be precise, only the LMDB implementation will decrease the memory usage by
moving this instance of the UTxO set to disk, but it comes at a cost as I/O has
to be performed to read and write values. We expect SPOs with powerful machines
to use the InMemory implementation and every other user to move to the LMDB

> implementation.

Reviewer 4: Maybe mention that a bespoke back-end is also being implemented but won't be part of the first release?

And/or explain why LMDB is sufficient now but might not remain sufficient in the (near) future?

Author: Added

to make sure that we are able to complete the operation, and for that we need
the values in the backing store to remain unaltered for the duration of the
process. For this goal, we use a
[`LedgerDBView`](../../../ouroboros-consensus/src/ouroboros-consensus/Ouroboros/Consensus/Storage/LedgerDB/BackingStore.hs)
which is an immutable view on the backing store values plus a `DbChangelog` that
can be used to perform forwarding operations. We take advantage of the fact that
the backing store implementations can provide a consistent view of the stored
values while accepting updates in other threads.

### Applying blocks

From the point of view of the communication with the Ledger rules, it turns out
that for each block we need a way to inject (and project) the ledger tables into
the actual ledger state so that we can continue using the Ledger code without
modifications. As the Ledger ledger-state type depends on the type of the block
(`ChainValidationState` for Byron, `NewEpochState` for Shelley and
`HardForkLedgerState` for the `HardForkBlock`), each block type defined in the
Consensus layer has to provide a way to do so.

> The Consensus-Ledger API makes use of this projection/injection functions for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Consensus-Ledger API makes use of these projection/injection functions for
```

    backingStore:::backingstore --> readKeySets
    readKeySets --> unforwardedTables
    state "unforwardedTables :: LedgerTables l ValuesMK" as unforwardedTables
    block --> rollback:::operation
    rollback --> truncatedDbChangelog 
    state "emptyInputState :: l EmptyMK" as emptyInputState
    truncatedDbChangelog --> current:::operation
    truncatedDbChangelog --> getDiffs:::operation
    current --> emptyInputState
    classDef operation fill:#BDB76B
    state "seqDiff :: LedgerTables l SeqDiffMK" as seqDiff
    getDiffs:::dbchangelog --> seqDiff
    seqDiff --> forwarding:::operation
    unforwardedTables --> forwarding
    state "forwardedTables :: LedgerTables l ValuesMK" as forwardedTables
    forwarding --> forwardedTables
    emptyInputState --> withLedgerTables:::operation
    forwardedTables --> withLedgerTables
    withLedgerTables --> inputState
    state "inputState :: l ValuesMK" as inputState
    inputState --> stow:::operation
    state "stowedState :: l EmptyMK" as stowedState
    stow --> stowedState
    block --> apply:::operation
    stowedState --> apply
    state "resultingState :: l EmptyMK" as resultingState

>     apply --> resultingState

Reviewer 4: I suggest making `apply` a different color, since it's the only node that represents interacting with the ledger.

Or maybe, since `stow`ing is also due to our goal of this first release requiring no changes from ledger, we should include stowing in this color as well?

Perhaps instead of color, you could use a subgraph to draw a box around the stow, apply, and unstow parts.

    resultingState --> unstow:::operation
    state "unstowedState :: l ValuesMK" as unstowedState
    unstow --> unstowedState
    unstowedState --> projectLedgerTables:::operation
    state "resultingTables :: LedgerTables l ValuesMK" as resultingTables 
    projectLedgerTables --> resultingTables
    unstowedState --> forgetLedgerTables:::operation
    state "emptyResultingState :: l EmptyMK" as emptyResultingState
    forgetLedgerTables --> emptyResultingState 
    state "dbChangelog" as dbChangelog2
    emptyResultingState --> withLedgerTables2
    resultingTables --> diff:::operation
    forwardedTables --> diff
    state "diffTables :: LedgerTables l DiffMK" as diffTables
    diff --> diffTables
    state "withLedgerTables" as withLedgerTables2
    diffTables --> withLedgerTables2:::operation
    state "diffState :: l DiffMK" as diffState
    withLedgerTables2 --> diffState
    diffState --> dbChangelog2:::ledgerdb: to store
```

> ### Era boundaries

Reviewer 4: I think this section is redundant, because the next section repeats some of it and supersedes the rest.

Author: Indeed it is an artifact of a bad copy-paste on my side

In general, ticking a ledger state should not modify the values in the UTxO set,
but there are two exceptions in the Cardano case when ticking crosses an era
boundary. For this reason, the general scheme for **ticking a block is: a ledger
state without a UTxO set (`EmptyMK`) goes in and a ledger state with some deltas
(`DiffMK`) comes out**. This is reflected in `applyChainTickLedgerResult`.

```haskell
applyChainTickLedgerResult ::
     LedgerCfg l
  -> SlotNo
  -> l EmptyMK
  -> LedgerResult l (Ticked1 l DiffMK)
```

### Ticking and era boundaries

In general, ticking a ledger state won't modify the values in the UTxO set, but
there are two exceptions in the Cardano case when ticking crosses an era
boundary: 

- For simplicity, we have deliberately chosen that the Byron era would not have
  any ledger tables, and there would only be ledger tables starting in Shelley.
  This means that when crossing the boundary to Shelley, the whole UTxO set will
  be returned as deltas (see `translateLedgerStateByronToShelleyWrapper`

>   [here](../../../ouroboros-consensus-cardano/src/ouroboros-consensus-cardano/Ouroboros/Consensus/Cardano/CanHardFork.hs)).

Reviewer 4: It might be worth mentioning that this UTxO set was small compared to today's UTxO. (... it was, right?)

Author: Done

     LedgerCfg l
  -> SlotNo
  -> l EmptyMK
  -> LedgerResult l (Ticked1 l DiffMK)
```

As one might have noticed, the diagram for applying a block is missing the
ticking step, but it would complicate the diagram too much. The actual flow is:

- The `emptyInputState` is ticked, producing a `Ticked1 l DiffMK`.
- The `forwardedTables` are also forwarded through the diffs coming from
  ticking.
- The diffs from ticking are prepended to the resulting diffs before being
  stored in the `DbChangelog`.

### The mempool

The mempool behaves pretty much as a virtual block. The design is not
particularly complex as we just ask the backing store for the inputs for a
transaction when applying it. The only caveat compared to the pre-UTxO-HD
implementation is that previously it cached the latest ledger state and
therefore we could run a separate thread that would sync the mempool with the
LedgerDB and revalidate all the transactions when necessary, but now we might
not be able to apply a transaction if the ledger state on top of which we had
applied the others is now gone from the LedgerDB. Therefore, adding a
transaction might in some cases trigger a sync with the LedgerDB and therefore a

> revalidation of the previous transactions.

Reviewer 4: Maybe mention that the old behavior that is no longer possible was not a crucial behavior; it was just a matter of an innocuous race going one direction instead of another. In particular, the sync that now happens as part of the add was eventually going to happen in the old behavior too, just not necessarily promptly.

(Am I recalling this right?)

Author: Done

### Ledger state queries

Most of the queries don't require the UTxO set but there are three in particular
that do: `GetUTxOByTxIn`, `GetUTxOWhole` and `GetUTxOByAddress`. We assume that

> `GetUTxOWhole` is a debug query so we don't pay much attention to it as we

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`GetUTxOWhole` is a debug query so we don't worry about its performance as we
```

> expect it will be used with small-ish UTxO sets. For `GetUTxOByTxIn`, the story

Reviewer 4: Even if `GetUTxOWhole` is used with a large set, that's the user's problem, not ours, right? They chose to use a `Debug` query.

So I don't know that the mention of small UTxO sets is helpful here.

Author: Yeah, good point.

is simple, query the Backing store for the `TxIn` and forward it through the
sequence of diffs.

However, it is `GetUTxOByAddress` that poses a real problem, as we need to query
the whole UTxO set, apply all the differences to it and then traverse it

> entirely to find out the UTxOs belonging to an address. This query is now quite
> slow and in fact its usage is discouraged. It should not be a responsibility of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
entirely to find out the UTxOs belonging to an address. This query is quite slow
even without UTxO-HD and in fact its usage is already discouraged. It should not be a responsibility of
```

the node to maintain access to this if it is not needed by the logic that runs
the blockchain, so the plan is to move this into a separate process/client that
runs an index of UTxOs by address that can provide fast access to it (see [#4678](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-node/issues/4678)).

Currently, a pre-UTxO-HD node performs this query in 7 seconds, but our ad-hoc

> measurements have shown that a UTxO-HD node takes ~40 seconds when using the

Author: Referenced in #310

InMemory backend and ~90 seconds when using the LMDB backend.

### The hard-fork tables

It is worth mentioning one important caveat that has given us quite a lot of
headaches while developing UTxO-HD. When a blockchain is running a
`HardForkBlock` (as Cardano does), the overall type of the data stored in the
`DbChangelog` and in the `BackingStore` are maps from some key type into an
N-ary sum of value types (one for each era). 

But applying a block in a particular era requires a ledger state in said era.
Whenever we inject `HardForkBlock` ledger tables into the ledger tables of the
particular era, we translate the inputs that belong to previous eras and we
unwrap the N-ary sum value effectively duplicating the map in which they are

> contained.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
contained, which destroys sharing on the heap within the ~LedgerDB~ DbChangeLog.
```

That's the key problem, right?

This is fine in the Consensus use case because the set of inputs for each block
will be quite small. However this imposes an important restriction, one cannot

> just simply project in and out the whole UTxO set on every ledger state (and not

Author: Yeah, I think it should be clear from the whole sentence. If one does a naive integration and just says "ok, you want me to use these tables, so I will just project in and out the whole UTxO set so that I conform to the types", then the memory will blow up. I think it is conveyed by the sentence 

> one cannot just naively project in and out a whole UTxO set on every ledger state (and not mantain a sequence of differences) to do a preliminary integration of UTxO-HD

`db-sync` and we used this in the implementation of the `cardano-api`
`foldBlocks` function (see the `Legacy.` functions used
[here](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-api/blob/06b35ea6bf2be148eaf59d60df7bb1ad309e26b9/cardano-api/internal/Cardano/Api/LedgerState.hs#L1397)),
so you might want to look there on how to do it.

### B) I want to use UTxO-HD

Then this is a vague list on the things that you will have to take into account:

- You will need something to store a sequence of differences. Either use the
  `DbChangelog` or roll out your own solution.
- You will need something to store the UTxO set, à la `BackingStore` (or you
  could use one of our implementations).
- Every reference to `LedgerState blk` will change its kind.
- If applying blocks, you will have to provide some way of injecting values into
  the UTxO of the ledger state. You will have to implement basically reading of
  keys, forwarding through some kind of `DbChangelog` and injection into the
  ledger state.
- Applying a block will return a set of differences that you will have to keep
  somewhere or apply on top of the latest ledger state.

> This is not very accurate as we have not yet had downstream clients integrating

Author: Added
